A Resilient Dynamic Gateway Selection Algorithm
Based on Quality Aware Metric for Smart Grids


Abstract — Smart Grids are the evolution of the current electri-
cal power system to meet the challenge of increasing demands for
energy in this century by fully integrating the electrical power
grid with data communication networks. The challenge faced
by this kind of network is to fulfill reliability and resilience
requirements in order to meet various types of services and
applications. Wireless mesh networks can provide scalability and
resilience to this communication network, but there are issues that
need to be addressed in order for them to be used in practical
Smart Grids. This paper proposes an algorithm for dynamic
selection of gateways in a multihoming Smart Grid network,
improving performance when a gateway’s failure occurs. It uses
a probabilistic approach for choosing gateways with good metrics.
Our evaluations indicate that the proposed algorithm makes the
routing protocol more robust and resilient against gateway failure
compared to existing algorithms for dynamic gateway selection.
Keywords—wireless mesh networks, gateway selection, smart
grid communication).


I.INTRODUCTION

The current electrical power system has an outdated hi-
erarchical architecture that does not meet the future de-
mands of energy consumption due to various limitations,
such as limited generation capacity, one-way flow of en-
ergy (generation-transmission-distribution-consumption), low
and deficient communication and reliability problems [1]. An
evolution of the existing electrical power system aims at
solving these problems, improving efficiency, reliability and
security, integrating the use of renewable energy produced
by consumers, departing from the current one-way flow and
deploying a two-way flow for energy and communication [1],
[2]. A two-way communication infrastructure is essential for
Smart Grids [3], because it needs to send commands and to
receive information from its components and sensors in real
time, with reliability, allowing monitoring, maintenance and
control of the entire grid.
Smart Grids have specific requirements of delay, band-
width, frequency of updates, reliability, security and time re-
sponse for each distinct application in their different fields [3].
The Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) is fundamental
and is the first step to realize a Smart Grid [4], [5]. Its require-
ments should provide robustness and resilience to prevent or
recover from problems, providing stability and reliability to the
AMI network. This communication may use available wired
or wireless technologies that support the exchange information
between components of the AMI [6], [7]. Different types of
technologies can be used: cellular technology [8], WiMAX,
ZigBee [8], RF Mesh [9], IEEE 802.11-based Wireless Mesh
Networks (WMN) and Power Line Communication (PLC)
[10].
PLC is a wired technology [6], but it has limitations. In
case of failures, such as physical disruption of power lines,
it would not be possible to maintain communication between
AMI components [11]. Wireless networks offer more benefits
than wired networks, such as lower cost, ease deployment
and signal availability in large areas [8]. Among all wireless
technologies, WMN has advantages compared to single-hop
infrastructured network architectures, since it communicates
in a multi-hop way that extends the coverage of the network
and allows communication with alternative paths in case of
failures [9], [12].
WMN, however, must be adapted to the communication
requirements of AMI, where hundreds of meters communicate
with Utility’s headend through a Data Aggregation Point
(DAP). DAPs are the gateways of this network. Typically,
an AMI is constituted of networks connecting meters in the
same neighborhood to a single DAP. Each DAP is connected
to the headend through AMI wide area network. The large
number of nodes is the main challenge for the WMN [13],
since more than 100 meters may be associated to one single
DAP. If all meters send data simultaneously this can cause
congestion in the network. A way to mitigate this problem is
the use of multiple DAPs. The routing protocol must be able
to find reliable routes to improve performance and meet the
requirements the AMI network.
Given the problems faced by routing protocols in WMN to
comply with AMI communication requirements, we propose
an algorithm that dynamically selects DAPs for communication
between meters and the headend. In this problem, we assume
that each meter can connect, through multiple hops, to a set of
DAPs. The main goal of this algorithm, called Dynamic DAP
Selection Algorithm (DDSA), is to increase the reliability,
robustness and resiliency allowing meters to use multiple
DAPs, thus improving performance in the presence of failure.
The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II,
describes the particularities of the AMI communication net-
work, its challenges and problems. Section III presents the
related work. Section IV proposes and explains the working
principle of DDSA. Section V presents the results obtained in
simulations. Section VI concludes the paper and presents ideas
for future work.


II.BACKGROUND


Nearly 8% of all generated energy is lost along the trans-
mission lines and 20% of the total generation capacity is only
to support peak demands, which represent only 5% of the total
demand [1]. About 90% of power outages and disturbances
are assigned to the distribution subsystem, thus the success
of a Smart Grid depends on the deployment of a reliable
interconnected distribution subsystem.
The AMI improves the reliability and changes the paradigm
to one where customer demand adjusts to the power generation.
The AMI is basically composed of smart meters, gateways (or
DAPs) and Utility’s headend, all interconnected by communi-
cation networks. The headend is connected to multiple DAPs,
which in turn have connections to multiple smart meters. The
meters send the measurement data to the headend through a
DAP and this traffic is characterized by the exchange of short
messages.
These messages have a payload that varies from tens to
hundreds of bytes and are sent periodically, typically in a 15
minutes interval, and remain inactive the rest of the time [14],
[7]. The headend can send commands and requests to meters
also through DAPs.
According to [15], each meter requires a band from 10 to
100 Kb/s and the latency should be less than 2000 ms. Since
investments in the power sector are long-lasting, it is desirable
that the AMI should also support long-term operations [5].
New demands for information may arise, making the require-
ments more stringent such as latency that should be less than
hundreds of milliseconds in applications that need information
in real time [16], [5].
The AMI traffic can be classified into regular and on-
demand. It is regular when data is automatically sent by the
meters at predetermined intervals [17], [7] and constitute the
majority of data traffic flowing through the AMI [5]. The on-
demand traffic is composed of alert messages from meters,
command and control sent by the headend to meters and the
responses to these commands [17]. In the latter type of traffic,
an increase in network congestion can occur due to the request
for sending information by headend to a large number of
meters that would send their replies simultaneously. The DAP
is a single point of failure, because all traffic between meters
and headend or vice versa flows through it. Hence a DAP
failure would prevent the entire network from working.
The residential density determines the amount of meters
per area, which according to [17] can be classified into
rural, suburban or urban scenario, with density varying from
10, 800 or 2000 meters per km2 , respectively. The external
environment conditions in combination with the number of
meters will determine the level of interference and attenuation
in communication between meters and DAPs.
Due to the peculiarities of the AMI network and due to
a large amount of meters acting as routers/clients, there is
a possibility of problems with loops and broken routes [18],
causing a degradation in performance that may lead to unmet
communication requirements. Thus the routing protocol should
handle this variation, providing an acceptable level of service
regardless of WMN density. Another problem is the increased
amount of collisions near the DAP because all packets are
forwarded to it [6].


III.RELATED WORK

The work in [11] proposes the use of WMN in the AMI
where multiple domains of mesh networks are connected by
a WiMAX backbone. This architecture provides redundant
paths between meters mitigating problems like broken routes
due to node failure increasing their resilience and making the
network fault tolerant. However, since this work considers
only one DAP acting as gateway in each WMN domain,
if it becomes unavailable there will be no communication
between the meters and the headend. This is the same problem
studied by [9], where the WMN consists of meters, routers and
collectors. The meters communicate with routers or directly
to collectors, and the latter controls up to 25,000 meters and
routers on a single network.
The work in [19] makes use of multiple gateways to
increase the WMN resilience, because in addition to providing
redundant paths, it also provides gateway redundancy.
The works in [20] and [21] are designed to meet the
requirements of AMI networks and make use of multiple
DAPs for communication between meters and headend, mod-
ifying the HWMP protocol (Wireless Hybrid mesh Protocol).
Although the work in [21] solves some deficiencies of the
HWMP protocol, it still suffers from other problems such as
route stability and loops. According to the authors, this is a
characteristic of the distributed backpressure system adopted
by them. However, neither of them has evaluated the protocol
behavior in an environment with DAP failure, nor using
adaptation of transmission rate, which increases the problem
of instability of routes. They use a base protocol that has
scalability problems due to the congestion caused by control
messages [22] making it difficult to use in AMI.
Our proposal, DDSA, makes use of multiple DAPs for
communication between meters and headend, and differs from
[20] and [21] because it is designed to improve performance in
environments with DAP failure and to be independent from the
routing protocol and metric. Moreover, it can be implemented
in a protocol that best suits the implementation of the AMI.
In DDSA for each new data packet, meters probabilistically
choose a DAP, from a set of available DAPs with good quality
paths.
IV.
DYNAMIC DAP S ELECTION A LGORITHM (DDSA)
The principle of the proposed algorithm is to randomly
select a DAP based on probabilities derived from the path
cost from the meter to each DAP. The better the cost for a
given DAP, the higher the probability of selecting it. The use of
multiple DAPs increases the reliability and performance of the
routing, because it is possible to choose routes to the headend
using any DAP.
For each DAP dj the probability P(mi ,dj ) is computed by
meter mi by the expression:


where M(mi ,dj ) is the value of the quality metric of the path
(mi , dj ), which is divided by the sum of the costs of the paths
from each DAP with respect to mi . Notice that this expression
assumes that the routing metrics assigns higher values for
better paths. If the used metric employs a reverse logic, the
following expression is used:


composed of smart meters and DAPs, ns-2 is set to simulate
a suburban external scenario using the shadowing propagation
model with the following parameters: path loss exponent =
2.7, standard deviation = 7.4 and reference distance = 1.0, as
defined in [17].


To prevent selection of DAPs with very low quality, a
threshold α is employed by the algorithm. Algorithm 1 shows
how the DAP choice is made for meter mi , first the best
metric is found, then its probability to be selected is computed.
This probability is multiplied by α, that have values between
0 and 1, resulting in a value γ that is compared with other
DAP’s probability. If a DAP’s probability is smaller than γ
it is discarded. The threshold α is a parameter of the DDSA
algorithm that affects the performance and the behavior of the
network. A lower value of α implies in selecting more DAPs
which improves resilience in case of DAP faults, as opposed
to a higher value which results in a more likely selection of
the best DAP, possibly resulting in improved performance.



V.PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Simulation Environment


The performance of DDSA is evaluated via the ns-2
simulator [23]. To simulate the behavior of a AMI network
Scenario used in the simulation.
(b) Packet delivery for nodes 12-23
(c) Packet delivery for node 16
Fig. 2.
Packet delivery rates.
The used simulation topology is composed of 36 nodes
arranged in a grid and 3 DAPs (Fig. 1). To simulate the
exchange of information between meters and DAPs in a typical
application of AMI, a Constant Bit Rate (CBR) UDP traffic
is used with fixed packet size of 400B [17] at the rate of 20
packets per minute. Each node sends 25 flows of data in a
(a) DDSA-30%
Fig. 3.
(c) Multi-DAP
(b) DDSA-85% (c) Multi-DAP
DAP choice by node 16 before failure.
(a) DDSA-30%
Fig. 4.
(b) DDSA-85% 
DAP choice by node 16.
synchronized way for every round of transmission. The UDP by the failure of the DAP. This can be noticed in Figure 2(b)
is an unreliable transport protocol, but has some advantages where, at time of 363 seconds, has about 86% of packet
such low latency. To make it more reliable its necessary to delivery rate while DDSA-85% and Multi-DAP have only
design a application layer protocol over UDP that implements 20,7% and 11,8%, respectively. This shows that the tendency to
its own transport service suitable for AMI traffic [24]. The distribute more packets among DAPs makes it more robust and
  packet delivery rate was calculated for the application layer. resilient than others when a failure occurs. Figure 2(c) analyzes
  We compute as failure in delivery packet if none of the flows the behavior of the packet delivery rate for one node. Node
    packet in a round are not received by any of the DAPs. The 16 was chosen because it is located geographically between
    exchange of information starts at time of 150 seconds and 2 DAPs. Note that with DDSA-30%, when DAP 2 fails, the
    at 300 seconds DAP 2 fails. A total of 10 simulations were reduction in the rate was not as sharp as for the other proposals,
    performed with a duration of 1150 seconds and in charts the becoming 77% and 85% better than DDSA-85% and Multi-
    confidence interval is 95%. DAP, respectively, at time 363 seconds.
The DDSA was implemented in ns-2 simulator using To understand how the behavior of DDSA differs from
OLSR [25] as the routing protocol. MARA [26] was employed the behavior of Multi-DAP in terms of DAP selection, in
as the routing metric and rate adaptation. In assessing the Figure 3 we shown the choices of node 16 using the three
results were evaluated: proposals during the simulations with a single seed for the
                       period prior to the DAP failure. As seen, the choice of α affects
                       the behavior in choosing the DAP. Notice how the lower α
                       (Fig. 3(a)) causes the farthest DAP (DAP 3) to be chosen. The
                      higher α (Fig. 3(b)) makes choices alternating between DAP 1
                      and DAP 2 that are closest and have better metrics, excluding
                     DAP 3 for having a quality that is too low. The Multi-DAP
                    (Fig. 3(c)) rarely makes exchanges between DAP, having only
                   used a different DAP in the last 25 seconds shown in the graph.
(1) DDSA with α = 0,3 referred as DDSA-30%;
(2) DDSA with α = 0,85 referred as DDSA-85%; and
(3) the mechanism for dynamic gateway selection that
   chooses the best DAP according to routing metric at
  the time of sending the data packet. We refer to this
 as Multi-DAP.
B. Simulation Results
Figure 2(a) shows the packet delivery rate for all nodes
as a function of time, considering the latest 60 seconds. It
is noticeable that the performance of DDSA-30% is better
than others proposals after the occurrence of the DAP failure.
At time 363 seconds DDSA-30% has about 95% of packet
delivery rate, while DDSA-85% has 73% and Multi-DAP has
69%. This happens because DDSA-30%, mainly in central
region of the network (nodes 12 to 23), is the less affected
Figure 4 shows the same information of Figure 3, but
extends the view to the whole period of simulation. After
the occurrence of the DAP failure at time 300 seconds it is
verified that the packets from nodes 16 are not received by any
DAP for a long time in the simulations with DDSA-85% and
Multi-DAP. For DDSA-85%(Fig. 4(b)), the gap to deliver new
packets lasted 64 seconds. For Multi-DAP (Fig. 4(c)), the gap
lasted 81 seconds. This happens because before failure they
start to send packets only to DAP 2. Note that for DDSA-30%
(Fig. 4(a)), there is no noticeable gap because node 16 already
for Multi-DAP they are above 40%. This demonstrates that
DDSA-30% distributes more evenly the packets among DAPs
in central region of network, improving the resilience against
DAP failures.
(a) DDSA-30%
(b) DDSA-85%
Figure 6 shows unavailability period for each node with
respect to the headend, i.e., the sum of the periods during
which each node could not reach the headend through any
DAP. It is noticed that the gap to deliver new packets, as seen
for the node 16, is repeated for other nodes in the central
region of the network. For DDSA-85% and Multi-DAP these
nodes suffered long delays to deliver packets to any DAP, while
DDSA-30% sustained lower delays. The average unavailability
period for the DDSA-30% was 11,5 seconds, for DDSA-85%
was 40,9 seconds and for Multi-DAP was 49,8 seconds. Notice
that even for node 13, for which the DDSA-30% totaled 108
seconds, its performance was better than with the two other
proposals (163 seconds with the DDSA-85% and 171 seconds
with the Multi-DAP). This node and node 14 are the closest
ones to the failed DAP 2, thus suffering more influence of this
failure, because its path cost is much better compared to the
other DAP.
Finally, Figure 7 shows the packet delivery rate for all
nodes considering all simulation time. It is observed that the
central region of the network is the most affected by the failure
of the DAP. For these nodes, DDSA-30% is the less affected
by the fault with a performance above DDSA-85 % and Multi-
DAP, for which most of nodes in the central region showed a
low packet delivery rates.
VI.
(c) Multi-DAP
Fig. 5.
Percentage of DAP usage by each node.
balances the load among all DAP.
To check if this behavior is shared by other nodes, we
gathered the information shown in Figure 5. We shown the
DAPs choices of all nodes using intensities of grayscale to
represent the percentages of DAP choices by nodes. Higher
values are represented by darker gray and lower values by
lighter gray. Each matrix represents the percentages of choices
for one DAP and each element is a representation of the nodes
position. We can observed that DDSA-30% (Fig. 5(a)) has a
much more balanced DAP selection than the other proposals,
which can be seen by the elements with intermediate gray. For
nodes in the central region of the network with DDSA-30%
the lowest value is 14,2%. For DDSA-85% (Fig. 5(b)) and
Multi-DAP (Fig. 5(c)) six nodes (nodes 12, 15, 16, 19, 20,
23) do not choose DAP 1 or DAP 2. Except by nodes 13 and
14, in DDSA-30% all values in the central region are below
40% for DAP 2. DDSA-85% all values are above 38% and


CONCLUSION


This work presented DDSA, a dynamic DAP selection
algorithm to increase the reliability and resilience of AMI
applications through the use of multiple DAPs in WMN
networks. In this kind of network, the DAP has an important
role in exchanging information between the meter and the
headend because all traffic flows through it. A failure in a DAP
difficult the exchange of information on the AMI network, so
alternative routes through other DAPs should be used after
failure to sustain communication between meters and headend.
The results obtained showed that the DDSA increased the
resilience of routing protocol even suffering with DAP failure
evidenced by lower loss in performance at the application
layer. The results also showed the importance of the choice
of the α parameter that influences the routing behavior. Lower
values favor resilience, because DDSA distributes more pack-
ets among DAPs.
For future work we intend to do a deeper analysis in
variation of α parameter to observe the behavior of DDSA
and find values that brings more resilience or improving
performance in routing. We also intent to study the use of
dynamic adaptation of the α parameter and to analyze other
metrics to improve the performance and resilience in a region
with failure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by CNPq, CAPES, FAPERJ,
TBE/ANEEL and CELESC/ANEEL.
Fig. 6. Unavailability Period.
Fig. 7. Packet delivery for each node.

